In this video I'd like to go over the basics of algorithms in the standard template library the ACL
algorithms work on sequences of elements that are obtained from as T.L. containers using iterators.
It's really a beautifully designed library.
The SBL has many common and useful algorithms.
Once you learn how to use them you'll keep coming back to them over and over again.
There are many algorithms and the algorithms themselves have many variants way too much to describe
in a single section of a course.
I'll go over some useful algorithms.
But more importantly I'll teach you the techniques involved so that you can use any FCL algorithm you
can refer to online references such as C-p reference dot com for details about the entire algorithms
library.
Many of the algorithms in the ACL require the programmer to provide extra information in order for them
to work.
For example suppose we want to display all the even numbers in a container.
We can use an algorithm called for each that will apply a function to each element in the container
but it depends on the program are providing that function.
So there are three main ways in the SPL to provide such information to algorithms.
They are functors or function objects function pointers and lambda expressions.
I'll show you a simple example of each.
So you know them but I'll be using lambda expressions for the examples in this section.
You should also use lambda expressions in your code.
Since this is how to do it going forward in modern C plus plus.
So what do these algorithms look like and how do we use them.
We saw a simple example of using the accumulate algorithm a few videos back.
But in this video I want to show you a few more and then will code some in the ID first in order to
use the FCL algorithms we must include the algorithms header file.
It's also important to understand that different containers support different types of algorithms and
since algorithms depend on iterators this determines the types of out rhythms we can use with certain
containers.
I know this sounds complicated but it's really not so bad.
As you become more experienced with the SPL it all becomes second nature.
So before I show you some examples of ASL algorithms in action let's talk about iterator invalidation
this topic can get quite complex.
But let's look at it in its simplest terms.
We know that iterators point to container elements we need to understand that it's possible that an
iterator may become invalid during processing.
Let's see a very obvious example.
Suppose we have an iterator and we're iterating over the elements of a vector and displaying the elements
as we go.
Then as we're doing this we call the vectors clear method.
This deletes all of the elements from the vector but the iterator doesn't know that the iterator will
happily continue iterating until it sees the end of the vector.
But this is no longer valid if something like this happens then the behavior is undefined in C++ Every
as T.L. container has documentation about when iterators become invalid.
We don't worry too much about it in this section but it's something to be aware of as you move onto
more advances T.L. work after this course.
OK so let's see some examples of FCL algorithms.
First let's look at the find function the find algorithm tries to locate the first occurrence of an
element in a container like most as T.L. algorithms.
There are many variants available so let's keep it simple.
If the function finds the element it returns an iterator that points to the element it just found.
If the function does not find the element it will return an iterator pointing to the end of the container.
Pretty simple.
So let's see this in code.
First we declare a vector of integers we'll call it Veck and we initialize it to the integers 1 2 and
3 we then call stood find and pass in the iterators we need to get the sequence of elements we want.
After that we pass in the element we want to find.
In this case we call find with Venkat began vector and end three.
So we want to find three and we want to search the entire vector the result of the function will be
stored in a variable EHLO see I'm using auto to let the compiler deduce the type of ellos.
But you know what it must be an iterator to a vector of integers.
That's it.
Now we can check the value of EHLO C and if it's not vector end we know EHLO C's pointing to the first
occurrence of 3 and we can do whatever we want with it.
In this case I'm just displaying it.
OK so let's take a breath here.
Understand the power we have.
We just found the first occurrence of an element in a vector.
What if we wanted to find the first occurrence in a list or another type of container.
It works exactly the same way.
That's the power I'm talking about.
We don't need to know the details about how the container is implemented or how complicated fighting
element might be behind the scenes.
Remember find needs to be able to compare two elements in order to see if they're the same in order
to do this.
It will use the equality operator for primitive types like ants.
We don't have to do a thing since the compiler knows how to compare primitive types.
But if we're using our own user defined objects in containers then we must provide the overloaded equality
operator for objects since that's what the algorithm will call.
In this case you can see we have a vector of player objects.
Let's assume it's initialized to a bunch of players and we define P to be the player we want to find
in the vector.
Notice the code for the find function.
It looks the same as for any except for the P.
The only difference is that the compiler will compare P to the container elements using the overloaded
equality operator that you must provide in the player class.
Also we can define what equality means we might want all player attributes to match or only the name
or only the expwy we have all the power to decide.
Now let's look at a more complex algorithm for each function.
This function applies a function to each element in the iterator sequence.
OK but what function does it apply whatever function you tell it to apply.
That's pretty cool.
So how do we provide this function to the for each function.
There are three ways and I'll show you each way in the following slides we can use functors function
pointers and lambda expressions functors and function pointers have been around since the beginning
of the as T.L. lambda expressions were added in C++ 11.
And they're really the way to go in modern C++.
So let's write a for each function that displays the square of each integer element in the vector.
First let's do it with a functor.
In this slide we'll see how we can use a functor or function object.
But let's start at the bottom first.
In the last statement we're using it for each function and providing the iterator parameters as usual.
So this will iterate over the entire vector vec.
OK.
Now look at the last parameter Square.
In this case Square is an object a function object of type square functor.
You can see where I created the square object in red type and square functor is a structure.
It can also be a class that has a single public method.
I know this might look a little strange.
The method that's being overloaded is the function call operator.
That's the open and closed parentheses.
It expects a single item.
That's the same type as the elements in the container we're processing.
And in this case it executes the code for each integer passed into it.
OK I know this sounds pretty complicated but let's walk through it.
We're going to iterate through each element in the vector and in each iteration the overloaded function
call operator function for the square object will be called and the current container element is passed
to it.
In this case we'll call square and each container element will display.
So in this case we get 1 4 9 and 16 since they're squared.
Note that the original container elements are not modified.
Now let's do the same thing but using function pointers instead of a functor.
Again let's start at the bottom.
Notice that the code for the for each algorithm is exactly the same.
But in this case the square parameter is not a function object it's the name of a regular function and
we declared that function at the top of the slide and read what's being passed into the for each function
is a pointer to the square function which is really the address of the function square itself.
So at each iteration of the for each loop the square function will be called in the current container
element passed into it.
So we get the same output as with the functor 1 4 9 and 16.
Notice that we only use the function name as the parameter.
We don't place parentheses after it says that would call the function.
That's not what we want.
Finally in the next slide we use a lambda expression to accomplish the same thing.
In this example we use the lambda expression directly in the function call lambda expressions were introduced
in C++ 11 as I said and they're widely used in modern C++.
If you come from another language you may know them as lambdas closures blocks or anonymous functions.
It's basically all the same.
First notice that we have no other code except the call to the for each algorithm.
One of the benefits of lambda expressions is that we can define them right where they're being used.
The first part of the for each function is the same.
We're providing our iterators the last parameter is what changes.
In this case we're using a lambda expression the syntax of the land expression will become more clear
with time and practice.
But it consists of a pair of square brackets followed by the parameters that will be passed into the
lambda expression in parentheses.
In this case a single integer which will name x.
Then this is followed by the body of execute.
That's it.
It's really pretty easy and all in one place.
So we know exactly what's happening in each iteration by looking right in the function call.
I'll go over a couple of other SCEA algorithms and I'll use lambda expressions and walk through them
and the next.
So let's head over there in the next video.